---
layout: post
author: Georgios Gousios
title: The Issue 32 incident - An update
categories:
---

Many of you are aware of the [GHTorrent issue
32](https://github.com/ghtorrent/ghtorrent.org/issues/32). To sum up the
discussion in a couple of lines, various developers included in GHTorrent wanted
their email removed from it (which I did) and then wanted all emails to be
excluded from the dataset (which I refused to do). The reasons behind the
requests where _privacy_ and the _right to do what ever one wants_ with their
personal data (email in many jurisdictions is considered personal data). What
caused the whole thread was that researchers used GHTorrent as a source of
emails for _research surveys_ which were sent to thousands of developers, which
made some developers nervous with respect to the use of their personal data.

As a response to the issue, I had temporarily shut down access to GHTorrent
until the situation is cleared up. In the mean time, I have consulted with
several experts, mostly on the legal and data protection domain. The issue
even [caught the
interest](https://legalict.com/privacy/is-it-legal-for-ghtorrent-to-aggregate-github-user-data/)
of respected ICT laywer [Arnoud Engelfriet](www.arnoud.engelfriet.net/) and
caused interesting meta-discussion on a [legal
forum](http://blog.iusmentis.com/2016/02/29/mag-ghtorrent-openbare-data-github-aggregeren-als-onderzoeksdataset/)
(Dutch).

Here is what I learned.

### Personal data

Personal data are defined as "any information relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person". From the information that GHTorrent collects,
emails and real names can be considered as _personal data_.

As GHTorrent is processing personal data (e.g. linking users with their
actions), it must comply with data protection legislation. This includes:

* controlling access to and distribution of personal data
* informing subjects about how their personal data is used
* enabling subjects that are not in agreement with use of their personal data from
  the project to _opt-out_ of the collection
* enabling subjects to have their data completely removed ([right to be forgotten](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_to_be_forgotten))

Now, here is a catch: GHTorrent started as a project in Europe but has
since moved to the US (on the East-US Azure datacenter). Which legislative
domain should the project comply to? Most lawyers I've asked said that
being on the safe side is the best way to go, which means adhering to the
union of provisions of both European and US data protection laws.

### Privacy

GHTorrent is not required to create an _opt-in_ mechanism. Personal data has
been shared by subjects publicly and as GHTorrent is not breaking the terms of
use of GitHub, it can download and process them, if it complies with data
protection laws.

Moreover, GHTorrent has no liability on what its users are going to do
with the data; as a top consultant in our University's legal department
stated it, "a store owner is not responsible if you buy a hammer and kill
someone".

### Ethical considerations

The root of the problem lies in the domain of ethics; are we as researchers allowed
to use databases such as GHTorrent to target specific developers with our
research surveys? Can we profile developers using their public activity traces?
Can we rank developers based on how good a code they write? Can we recommend work
to developers (e.g. solving issues), based on their expertise on specific
project areas, programming techniques or other projects? There are no easy
answers. Personally, I have run
[surveys](http://gousios.gr/blog/How-do-project-owners-use-pull-requests-on-Github/)
[twice](http://testroots.org) and even [provided
guidance](http://gousios.gr/blog/Scaling-qualitative-research/) on how to do it
at scale.

I think one safeguard that we definitely need to employ is _anonymity_: we can
do research with publicly available traces BUT we should make sure that the
results (when shared) never reveal the true identity of any developer.

### A course of action

To comply with legal requirements, GHTorrent will do the following:

* No real names and emails will be shared in the MySQL dumps or the online MySQL
  access services. All other database fields will be left untouched. Researchers
  interested to mine GitHub users can do so using the `login` field as
  reference. Going to the email is a GitHub API call, but it will be the
  responsibility of the researcher to go the extra mile. GHTorrent itself will
  continue to use emails internally, to ensure consistency of the data.

* GHTorrent will offer to interested researchers a file that links logins
  to personal data. To obtain access to it, researchers will need to agree
  to the terms of use and publicly state the indented use, by submitting
  a pull request [here](http://ghtorrent.org/pers-data.html).

* A FAQ with specific privacy-related questions/answers will be created and
  shared on GitHub. People can submit their questions in [this
  page](http://ghtorrent.org/faq.html).

* An opt-out process will be created; developers who do not want to be tracked
  will be able to do so by completing a form on the GHTorrent web site. This
  will have the effect of their `name` and `email` fields being replaced with
  random strings.

* The research community will need to work on a code on conduct wrt the use of
  personal data for research. Underground processes have started already; we
  should co-ordinate those efforts and will hopefully come up with a document
  during this year's [MSR conference](http://2016.msrconf.org).

The changes (esp the opt-out process) will need some time to be implemented; in
the meantime, GHTorrent will re-enable online access to the datasets (excluding
email addresses and real names in MySQL of course), but will not offer downloads
until all the measures above have been put into place.

### Personal reflection

In the heat of the discussion, I have made a couple of statements that i) were
wrong ii) made the discussion hotter. Initially, I was wrong in that copyrighted
content shared on the web without a license is in the "public domain". The
opposite is actually true: copyrighted content on the web with no accompanying
license means that all rights are reserved by the copyright holder (usually the
content creator). Moreover, I said that "GHTorrent tracks public data", while
emails and names are in fact personal data, as they identify a person uniquely.
Finally, as a researcher, I have
[witnessed](http://gousios.gr/blog/How-contributors-use-pull-requests-GitHub/)
and
[documented](http://gousios.gr/blog/How-do-project-owners-use-pull-requests-on-Github/)
the negative effect of online conflict on GitHub and still I managed to fall
into the same trap.

I would like to thank Arie van Deursen, Arnoud Engelfriet, Leon Moonen, Mario
van der Toorn, and Alexis Zavras for advice and support those hot last two
weeks.
